Thank you. Welcome,
Welcome.
So we've got 10 minutes, uh, set aside
for your submission.
So you're welcome to use all of that,
or, um, leave some time for
Questions. I use about eight
minutes on it,
So, okay. Okay.
And if you, Thanks. Good foreshadowing.
Thank you so much. Over to you
Koto, be and honorable committee members.
I'm Paul Theto, CEO of Rights. Rah.
I appear before you today to deliver
what I hope will be the most important testimony.
Who you here on this bill?
I contend I'm uniquely qualified
to comment on the proposed legislation
because I'm both a human rights professional
and the holder of a master's degree in business strategy,
organizational science
and leadership from LBS of the business school.
The proposed legislation engages issues
that the intersection of human rights
and organizational strategy.
I was very proud of being accepted into LVS.
It was an extremely competitive entry process,
and competing the full-time taught degree on site in London
was one of the most intense work periods of my life.
Now, I appreciate this diversion
because I had tremendous
talks from world leaders, business leaders,
and two sports coaches, Eddie Jones
and the leader of the Ride Cup team, Paul McGinley.
And I'm gonna come back to them at the end about
what makes a high performing team.
So now I sit back
before you in A-T-R-R-A Kiwi commenting on a proposed bill,
which in my opinion represents one
of the most catastrophically evidence defined pieces
of legislation we've ever proposed.
So I focus on the provisions of the bill, which will get rid
of diversity, equity, and inclusion.
The first and overarching reason
that we should reject the diversity, equity,
and inclusion destroying provisions of this bill is
that they're based on an entirely false premise.
The bill's proponents claim diversity undermines merit.
This is demonstrably empirically, categorically false.
I will now present extremely strong research from London
Business School that demonstrates the exact opposite.
So, first of all, I had a wonderful professor called
Professor Nia Abara, who's a world leader in DEI.
She has spent 30 years documenting
what she calls second generation bias,
the invisible barriers that prevent genuine meritocracy.
Who research published in the Harvard Business Review
incited over 15,000 times reveals
that without DEI frameworks,
organizations don't achieve merit-based selection.
They achieve homogeneity through unconscious exclusion.
Old white men exclude minorities unconsciously
through patterns of behavior.
This is very clear throughout all her research.
Consider her findings. Senior leaders unconsciously sponsor
proteges who remind them of themselves.
Now, I know you will all have,
we've all worked in organizations
and you'll know, you'll see that pattern.
Importantly, women receive 75% high,
fewer high visibility assignments, critical for advancement
performance criteria systematically favor
stereotypically masculine traits.
And without structured DEI interventions,
informal networks exclude diverse talent.
So this isn't just me with a non-work ideology here.
This is real research backed up
from a leading business school.
Now, I want to ask you to not close your eyes for a second,
but just imagine all the leadership training you have ever
been to in your life.
It has told you to be authentic, hasn't it?
To work on some sort of authentic version
of yourself and your leadership.
Well, Nia has this amazing concept
of the authenticity paradox,
and it's particularly damning for this bill.
So when marginalized people are told to just be yourself
and workplaces designed for others,
they face an impossible choice, conform and lose your,
and lose your identity, or remain authentic and be excluded.
DEI frameworks resolve this paradox by broadening
what leadership looks like.
Removing these frameworks as the bill does,
doesn't enhance merits.
It restores the old boys network.
We end up with a public sector
that looks like the Vienna Philharmonic,
not the New York Philharmonic.
And famously the New York Philharmonic is a very diverse
orchestra where the output represents very well the output
of global American and music schools,
while the Vienna based orchestra looks more
like our Prime minister.
So my second professor
Was Professor ais nu,
and he looked at how DEI helped organizations
improve their performance.
His 18 year longitudinal study published in management
science tracked companies
that adopted comprehensive ESG principles
of which DEI is a critical component.
The results very impressive.
High sustainability companies showed 5% higher annual
returns, superior returns on assets and equity,
and more importantly, an applicable to the public sector,
public service, better operational efficiency
and greater resilience during economic downturns.
So let's be clear, organizations with strong DEI frameworks
outperform those who don't.
Now, in my opinion, the bill's proposal
to eliminate DEI is equivalent to a The other question.
No, you continue.
He wants to be the first question after you finish.
Okay, cool. Uh, so in the private sector,
if a private sector company did this,
I believe it would be considered managerial malpractice
and that all the directors could be sued for breach
of fiduciary duty.
Now, luckily, we actually have some evidence about
what will happen if you get rid
of the DEI clauses in the bill.
And we have this from the United States Federal government
earlier this year where they did something similar.
So as I put in my written submission,
and these are all referenced,
there was a 23% resignation rate amongst employees of color.
Within three months, 78%
of terminated DEI positions were women of color.
There were service delivery failures,
and there's ongoing constitutional crisis
and litigation all the way to the Supreme Court.
We don't want to re repeat this disaster in New Zealand.
We actually have evidence from another jurisdiction.
So coming briefly to the New Zealand context,
this bill would breach out
to tour obligations requiring active protection
of Maori interests, would violate our human rights treaties.
We ratified, including CDO
and I-C-C-P-R,
potentially trigger mass re resignations, costing hundreds
of millions, create legal chaos
and destroy public service capability.
The only government department in favor
of this bill will be Crown Law
because they will all be, they will all have jobs
for a very long time.
Now, I notice I've gone over time a bit,
so I'll just make two more points.
I would conservatively estimate the economic cost
of this bill to be over $4 billion in the first five
years of its implementation.
Now, how do I get to such a large number?
Well, after subtracting direct transfers like Welfare
and Super Ann and cost of debt financing,
the total public sector OPEX spend is
around 89 billion New Zealand dollars a year.
Imagine we lose just 2% of productivity
and efficiency on that number
and we have 3% more staff turnover.
We have some service delivery failures,
some litigation costs.
You easily get to that number as well
as being qualified in business.
I'm a human rights professional
and I just want to say that I,
to Toko the Human Rights Commission's excellent written
submission, and I deeply support Dr.
Pachecos oral submission.
This bill is both an organizational disaster area
and a human rights nightmare.
So, coming to the end, what would Eddie Jones
and Paul McGinley, the Rider Cup captain
who gave incredible talks.
Now LBS was confidential, so I can't repeat the date on
what they said, but I know from their public
comments what they would've said.
Their approach to building high performance teams is
categorically diverse
because there is always high performing individuals.
You'll always find high performing individuals on the
streets, but building them into a team is the hard part.
And interestingly, Eddie Jones has said publicly that
psychological safety is the most important
thing to building a team.
And so did Paul McGinley.
And you get psychological safety
from everyone feeling welcome and you get that from DEI
and just, I didn't mention this,
but Google has done incredible work on
what makes high performing teams and organizations
and they also identified psychological safety.
So honorable committee members, I contend
that DDEI is the winning formula for both rugby teams,
the Ryder Cup and the public service. Cool,
Thank you so much.
We had actually, um, used all your time now
and I imagine, I imagine Ed Andy was not gonna do a
short question knowing him.
So thank you so much, uh, for joining us.
Answer pushed. I can give you a very short answer.
No, that's fine. I apologies
for running, no for running outta time.
But thank you so much, um, for your presentation
for joining us and alright,
we've got our next submitters now trust
democracy who are joining us.
And so we've got Simon. Yeah, welcome. Thank you.
Good morning seeing the drill.
We've got 10 minutes for your oral submission today,
so you're welcome to use all the time
or our leave some time for questions over to you.
Okay. Um, thank you for having me.
Uh, just a little bit about trust, democracy.
Uh, it's a nonpartisan, um, nonprofit incorporated society,
um, fairly new formed in 2019.
And our purpose is to foster democratic innovation, uh,
for a fair, just, and inclusive society.
Um, we actually support aspects of the, uh, bill, um,
uh, especially around, um, the intention
to improve performance review systems and frameworks.
However, overall we see the bill is, um, regressive
for democracy in New Zealand.
Um, it further centralizes power, uh, weakens provisions
that ensure the public service reflects the communities it
serves, um, um, weakens mechanism mechanisms
that help governments stay cognizant of, of, um,
future opportunities and challenges.
And it increases the risks
of politicization of public service.
Um, the public services are cornerstone
of the New Zealand system of government,
and the laws governing it are some
semi constitutional in nature.
Uh, therefore, uh, this amendment should have been developed
through an open and inclusive and and transparent process.
Um, unfortunately, the process used to develop this bill
has not upheld those standards.
Uh, policy work
occurred largely in the public service without public
participation and consultation has only occurred at this
late stage committee.
Um, that approach does not uphold the public services acts.
The public service acts own principles,
particularly the principle of open government in section 12,
and the process to develop a bill
that reshapes the law governing the public service should
itself uphold its own acts principles.
So we recommend that the committee note these process
deficiencies in its report parliament,
and that future reforms follow the
principle set out in the act.
Open government, um, has a 40 year history in New Zealand,
um, yet still undefined in in law.
Um, the development of this bill reinforces the need
to add a clear statutory definition, anchored in access
to information, public participation and accountability.
Uh, defining open government in this way would make section
twelve's principles more concrete
and ensure that future reforms embody openness as a matter
of course, and enable their practical use
and integrity standards
and in performance review frameworks.
And that's, that's the, the value add
that they can, that they can bring.
Uh, trust democracy is concerned that several provisions,
uh, centralized power in the offices
of the Public Service commissioner
and the chief executive, the department of, um,
prime Minister and cabinet, uh,
weakening safeguards against politicization
Clause 30 gives the commissioner veto power over
so-called key positions.
The criteria for these positions are extremely broad
and not limited to senior leadership roles.
Uh, um, reducing the independence of chief executives
to make appointments makes political appointments easier.
We recommend that clause 30 be removed
or at a minimum that key positions be defined narrowly
as senior executive roles with published criteria.
Clause 32 would allow fixed term employees to be appointed
to DPM C'S Policy Advisory Group,
which provides advice directly to the Prime Minister.
This could enable political appointments to that group,
undermining the neutrality of the public service.
We therefore recommend that clause 34 B removed
high standards of integrity
and conduct are necessary for maintaining, uh,
trust in the public service.
We support, um, making mandatory
for the Public Service Commissioner
to issue minimum standards of conduct and integrity,
but Bill does not go far enough.
Under Clause 14,
the commissioner may decide whether these standards include
matters relating to the public service
principles and values.
We believe this should be mandatory.
Uh, integrity standards must explicitly reflect the core
values and principles defined in the act.
Surely the current guidance, uh, as far
as we can tell, was last updated in 2010.
This is totally out of date
and public, so that needs to be, um, uh,
rectified, uh, urgently.
Um, we're also concerned about clause 15,
which would extend, extend the commissioner's authority,
authority to agencies across the wider state services,
including the education sector
that would further centralized control
and could constrain the independence of institutions such
as schools and universities to set their own standards.
We therefore recommend that integrity standards be required
to cover the public service principles and values
and that clause 15 be reconsidered.
Uh, the bill removes provisions to ensure, uh, diversity,
equity, and inclusion across the public service.
Uh, we strongly object to this.
Um, these provisions were designed
to ensure the public service reflect the society it serves
and that employment decisions are fair and equitable.
Uh, clauses 21, 34, 35 and 39 together remove
or dilute, dilute obligations on chief executives
and commissioner to promote diversity,
inclusion and pay equity.
These are not minor adjustments.
They reverse progress towards a fair
and representative public service.
This runs counter to OECD guidance, which stresses
that diversity and inclusion must be maintained in public
institutions because, uh,
excluding underrepresented groups creates blind spots in
policy design, decision making and service delivery.
We therefore urge the committee to reject these amendments
and retain the current provisions safeguarding diversity,
equity, and inclusion.
The bill would centralize long-term insights briefings
with DPMC.
That's the wrong direction.
Each department should continue
to prepare its own briefings,
engaging the public on long-term challenges
and opportunities in its sector.
Centralizing foresight reduces diversity of thinking
and weakens opportunities for meaningful engagements.
To conclude the bill contains some positive elements, um,
but its overall direction is concerning it.
Centralizes power reduces inclusiveness
and risks politicizing the public service,
which undermines a longstanding tradition in this
country. It's,
Thank you so much. We
do have some, uh, questions in a little bit
of time. So Andy Foster.
Yeah, look, um, thanks so much Simon.
Nice to see you again. Um, couple of areas of questions.
First one of them is just in terms of the appointments to,
uh, the, um, DPMC, et cetera.
Yep. Uh, and I, I've,
I take the point about political appointments,
but sometimes when the public service,
and you also talk about ideological capture
of public service, um, the, there will be an argument
that says the public services to a degree sometimes is
ideologically captured by its own ideology.
And also, um, uh, the, the public service culture is,
is sometimes ve to bureaucratic rather than public service.
'cause those are two very different things sometimes do you
not need some people who are outside
that public service in those roles
to shake things up a little bit?
And I I do look at, um, you know, the,
the potentially bring in some private sector advice
that, um, might be helpful.
Any comment on that? So it's say political,
but it is about saying you want, sometimes you want people
outside the public service to
actually stir things up a little bit. Okay.
I, I certainly, di diversity is part
of your protection against the ideological capture, which is
what I've argued in the, in the, um, those provisions
around employment of public servants.
But I think there are many other ways of including
To, Uh, you have political advisors in your offices.
Um, there are many agencies have working groups made up
of external people from across the New Zealand
society experts.
So I think there are plenty of opportunities without, um,
uh, uh, affecting this particular institution.
The Okay. So it's,
it's where you put 'em in the institution.
Yeah. Um, and second area I wanted to ask you about was,
you talked about, um, which I completely agree with,
the performance reviews of chief executives.
Do you think we are strong enough in terms of the KPIs
and what we, what we look at
as success from entities themselves?
So I know that, that they're aligned with the,
the, the chief executives Yeah.
But that we're clear enough about what success looks like
for any given government agency.
Look, I, I'm not an expert in that area at all. At all.
Um, I, so I, I, I feel I I'm not really good to comment on
that, although it would seem to me
that things like principles and values set up
and act, um, if those principles
and values are well defined, they should be part of, of how
agencies are assessed and the performance
of chief executives are assessed. So we
Should have expectations as the key point
Or there are letters of expectations. Yes. Yeah.
I've just got a quick question, uh, too, so you mentioned
where, um, I think in relation to, uh, clause 15,
which means section 19 of the act, uh, that extends,
I think you said, the guidance on integrity
and conduct to, um, agencies
that could include schools and universities.
That is concerning to me.
'cause of course, uh,
our tertiary institutions have academic freedom.
So is is something that you would recommend?
I know that I think you recommended removing that entirely,
but I suppose another, um, improvement would be ex,
specifically excluding as Crown Research Institutes are
We, we, we trust democracy's a voluntary organization
and most of us have day jobs,
and we really struggled to understand how the,
the new provisions in the bill.
Uh, so what, which groups of, um, what parts
of the public service would be affected by those
We suspected they, they,
they could affect the education sector,
but honestly, we found it so difficult to work out.
So some clarity
around that. No, that's, that would be really great,
Really helpful, um, suggestion for us to take forward.
Yeah. Thank you. We have run out of time now. Okay.
Um, but thank you so much for, for joining us and,
and appreciate also to the previous submitter, um,
the early morning start.
Um, we really appreciate
you being here, so thank you so much.
Thank for that. And we've got our next submitter, uh,
joining us by Zoom, um, professor Jonathan Boston.
Welcome, Jonathan.
Alright. We've only got five minutes
for your submission, uh, so we'll, um,
I'll let you know when that starts,
but, um, please feel free to use that entire time.
We do have your detailed written submission with, um, uh,
you know, recommendations involved as well.
So, uh, over to you.
Well, Moana, thank you very much.
Just to say I agree with the two previous, uh, submitters.
Uh, in the brief time I have, I just like to focus in on the
proposed changes to the purpose statement.
Uh, as I'm sure members of the committee will be aware,
the legislation design
and advisory committee, uh, has highlighted
that purpose statements really matter.
They have legal weight,
they help clarify the main purpose of an act.
They signal the reasons for any change in high level policy.
They provide the basis for,
or at least one of the basis for implementing, monitoring
and assessing the performance of an act.
And they provide guidance to lawyers
and judges in their interpretation of the legislation.
And as I noted in my submission, I was one
of the primary drafters
of the purpose statement in the current Public Service Act,
along with Dr. Andrew Butler, kc.
The current purpose statement in Section 11
encapsulates the critical
and enduring constitutional roles of our public service.
It anchors the public service's legitimacy in values
that extend beyond individual political cycles
and underpins the need for prudent stewardship
and administrative continuity across successive governments.
The statement reads,
the public service supports constitutional
and democratic government enables both the current
government and successive governments to develop
and implement their policies.
Delivers high quality
and efficient public services, supports the government
to pursue the long-term public interest,
facilitates active citizenship
and acts in accordance with the law.
The proposed amendments
to this legislation remove three key provisions
in the purpose statement.
First, enabling successive governments to develop
and implement their policies.
Second, supporting the government
to pursue the long-term public interest
and third, facilitating active citizenship.
Well, I just have a simple question
for the members of the committee.
Why are these important roles which are generally agreed
constitutionally being removed from the
current purpose statement?
Could it possibly be the case
that the government doesn't believe
that the public service should enable successive governments
to develop their policies?
Or that the government doesn't believe
that the public service should support governments
to pursue the long-term public interest,
or that the government doesn't believe
that the public service should facilitate
active citizenship?
So it's a question to the committee.
Thank you, Jonathan. Um, uh, we do have some questions
for you and we've got a couple of minutes.
I'll go to Andy Foster first.
Yeah, look, thank you Jonathan. Um, just given
that you've, uh, focused on the
purpose statement, I'll do the same.
Um, just in terms of the, um,
the changes which were proposed, the one bit that
in effect is added, there is the words
and acts with the spirit of service to the community, um,
which you could actually gently drop into the existing one,
uh, ahead of, and acts in accordance with the law.
'cause that's in there as well. Um, do you,
could you give us a a view on that,
because it does strike me that there is a big difference
between a bureaucracy which can tend
to act in its own interests
or what it believes should happen
and service to the community?
So being a public servant
and being a bureaucrat are two
somewhat different things in terms of their nature.
So Andy, the current legislation provides
for the public service to act in a spirit of service.
So the additional provision there,
it doesn't change anything substantially what the
change is, the removal of three important. I
Got that. I've got that. But
Jonathan,
I'm asking you the question why,
because you stressed the
importance of the purpose statement.
Mm. Is you said the legislation includes that.
So is there anything that is offensive to you in including
with a Ann Acts with the spirit of service
to the community in what is, of course, section 11?
Uh, of course not Andy,
but it's there in the legislation already.
Fine. That's course, that's all I needed.
Alright, thanks.
Um, and thank you for your, uh, detailed, uh,
written submission.
I just wanted to ask, you've said that you, uh,
basically don't think this act should, should go ahead.
Um, is there anything, uh, in this
that would stand out apart from the purpose statement
as the, as the main area that you think should be changed?
Well, Well look, as my written submission indicates,
I have grave reservations about a number
of the provisions in the amending legislation.
And perhaps the most significant, frankly, are the changes
to the appointment arrangements with respect
to departmental chief executives,
which I fear will increase the incentives
for politicization, which would be devastatingly bad
for a small parliamentary democracy like New Zealand.
Uh, the, the probably the most fundamental point I'd want
to make though, is that constitutional legislation
of this kind should be developed on a cross party basis.
And in this case, it has not been, uh,
the previous government made every effort
to secure the support of parties outside the government.
Um, sadly that wasn't completely successful,
almost successful, but it did make the effort,
the current government has made no such effort.
Thank you. Thank you so much, Jonathan.
We've run out of time, but
appreciate you being with us today.
Thank you. Thank
You. Alright,
we have our next, uh, submitter, uh, group, uh,
which is the Interested Citizen group,
which is joining us via Zoom.
Yeah. Yep.
Thank you. Thank you very much for joining us.
Uh, we've got a copy of your written submission
and we do have 10 minutes set aside
for your oral submission today.
So welcome to the committee.
You're welcome to use all of that time.
Uh, we'll leave some time for questions at the
end. Uh, over to you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And, uh, I'm Margaret Evans
and I'm a long-term mayor of Hamilton,
and I think it's wonderful that we've got
so much local government experience around your table.
And it's interesting that we follow up, Jonathan.
Uh, I think that, um, I'm going
to introduce the members with me today.
Uh, on my side here is Raymond, who's got experience in,
uh, international Affairs finance.
This is Ruelle who comes from a background of, uh,
commerce and marketing.
And then there's, uh, uh, um, I'm, I'm sorry.
We are a very loose knit group. Now.
This is an experience of finance real estate and developed,
and I'm gonna get right to the point.
This is really simple.
Anybody that watched the results from last weekend's,
local government, uh, uh,
elections will understand the deep concerns about
democracy in this country.
So we are simply saying,
most people think it's the officials who run the place.
It is called the bureaucracy.
And we want to see elected representation strengthened.
So we are saying to you, please put an addendum
to this bill, send it across
to the local government regulatory bill that's going
through its process to ensure that the expectations
of public servants, those across local government as well
as central government.
So that's the message as simple as that.
And I'm going to ask our team if they want
to add anything else.
Okay.
Oh, that's Rayford here.
Um, the all I've got really is a question as to
how a group such as us could actually help progress
the changes that you're promoting.
Um, Yes, I, I would agree with Margaret and also Ray.
Um, I'm really concerned about the performance
of city council in Hamilton.
Um, I'm over the
national policy statement in urban development capacity.
Um, council has confirmed they're not complying
with the legislation, and yet there seems to be no mechanism
to actually hold anyone to account.
And, and this comes back to the point of
who is actually running councils.
And that's why we are so interested in the work
that you are doing.
And we see its relevance to local government. Michelle.
Oh, I think that's, um, quite obvious in the low turnout
at city council elections, you're lucky to get 20, 25%
because most people feel that they can't, even if they vote,
they're not influencing anything
because there's a whole lot of other people
behind the scenes that they dunno that are really in charge.
And quite often that is actually the case.
So I guess that's our overview.
We are saying you understand local
government possibly as well as anybody.
And we think that the concerns
about public sector are widespread
and we constantly hear the expression Yes, minister.
Simple.
Thank you. Uh, well, thank you very much, uh,
for your submission and your, um,
and your ideas, um, that I think are, are, um,
some different ideas for the ones that we've heard before.
We do have some questions. I've got one
and we'll start with Andy.
Yeah. Look, um, look, thank you very much
for the, the submission.
Uh, yes, ministers were a favorite program,
if I might say this still has great currency.
I think, um, the question is, we've got some comments
that you've been made about the, um, the, the,
the key power obviously sits in with,
with chief executives in terms of the organizations, um,
about the appointment of chief executives.
And actually, uh, you've seen,
you've referenced local government.
We also have the same, uh, discussion in front of, um,
US in terms of local government where the idea is
to go from five plus two to five plus five or up to five.
And I just wonder if, um, you,
and then here we've got the issue of do chief executives,
they get to the end of five years and they've gotta reapply,
uh, as opposed to potentially saying,
actually you're doing a good job, carry on.
Do you have a view as the best way of, um, appointing
or reappointing extending
or not extending chief executives both in the public sector,
government, public sector,
and in the public sector, local government sector?
Um, I'm happy to point out that
the concern the local government level is not different from
some of the concerns of central government about
managerialism and about career people
who go from one department to another department
and end up in a senior position without real depth
of knowledge which relates to that particular section.
And of course, the logical consequence that adds
to the cost of consultants.
So coming back to the point, uh,
we've had some discussions about the proposed legislation
to do with the ability to fire anybody over the salary peak
of $180,000.
And we think that's the side of the debate
that needs further enhancing the ability to actually get rid
of a non-performing chief executive without having the
cumbersome problem of are they meeting all
of these key points.
Uh, um, we do know
that there are examples everywhere across the country
of non-performing senior managers,
but it's how you get rid of them.
Okay, Thank you.
If I could comment, there's also the, the question
regarding the performance of those who are elected as well
in that, uh, you know, certain promises are made
invariably not carried out as they are, uh,
integrated into the, the system.
And the, the conversation
that we have here is the one using the recall provision,
which is one that's used in the states.
It's a legal process,
but allows the community to actually say, enough is enough.
We need to take some action,
and here is the proper process for doing that.
And can I add to that?
I think it's what Jonathan just said.
We think it's timely in this country to have a cross party
deep and extensive discussion about the problems
that we have with democracy.
And that includes the public sector.
That leads us, of course, into the whole concept
of constitutional discussion.
And if that's to be the case, we are saying do it broadly.
Do it right across the country, do it deeply,
allow opportunities for a range of people to talk.
That's why we call ourselves the Concerned Citizens Group
because we are not a formal organization.
We just bring in people when we know that there's an issue
that needs to be addressed.
And if you look deeply,
you will see we've actually given submissions to three
or four different aspects that have come
through in the last month.
And, um, I mean, that includes codes of conduct.
We could start talking about
that if you really wanted us to.
I make a comment. Yeah. Thank you so much.
Well, yeah, we do do have another local government
bill in front of us as well.
Um, but no, we'll take those, um, those points on board
and yeah, thank you for your, for your engagement
and for your, um, uh,
for your interesting suggestions to us.
And, and we have, we have noted those.
And thanks sofa, your engagement with other committees too.
Appreciate that. Thank you. Thank you.
We've now got our next, um, submitter on, uh,
in person, um, for workplace inclusion.
Thank you. Thank you so much
for joining us, uh, in person.
We've received a copy of your written submission, um,
and I believe we've got 10 minutes
for your, um, oral submission.
So are you welcome to use time
or leave some time for questions over to
You. Sure. Thank
you very much for having me this morning.
Um, the organization that I represent today is
Center for Workplace Inclusion.
Um, you will probably best knowed
as the previous Equal Employment Opportunity Trust.
Yes. Um, so
I just wanna offer a few reflections today.
Um, and I, I'm not going into detail in my,
in my submission, you've got that there.
Um, but the reason why I've chosen to be here today is
because I'm genuinely worried, um, that in this time
of global polarization around the terms diversity, equity,
inclusion, we are about to throw out some
of the most sensible clauses
that help us build social cohesion, help us build, um,
productivity and help us build good economic outcomes for.
So I wanna recognize, and,
and our scope of submission was particularly
around four clauses that speak
to the diversity inclusion aspects
and pay equity, um, specifically.
Um, there are, there's much more in that act
that we actually do support in terms
of strengthening the public service.
But in terms of those four clauses,
um, Apologies.
I wanna recognize that there are groups in society,
as there always is on the edges, um, who push
for specific agendas.
And unfortunately what we've seen over the last while is
that those agendas was co-opted the terms
and the disciplines of diversity, equity, inclusion,
which really is all about how do we remove barriers
for people to participate more productively in society.
How do we not look at just our small group
of people in our networks when we make appointments, um,
and when we make recommendations.
So for me, the main issue today was, um,
are we seeing that the definitions around diversity, equity,
inclusion, the definitions of what ma what makes merit?
Are we seeing that those are actually impacting
what we are proposing in this specific act?
So, um, I wanted to specifically talk about merit.
The, the bill claims to strengthen merit based appointments.
Um, merit though is not neutral.
Um, it is shaped by who gets seen, um,
and who gets supported and who get a, who gets access.
So if we don't have any safeguards in our act, um,
against the bias
and against those excl exclusion, merit will just reinforce
who we already have in our systems.
So removing diversity, equity, inclusion from our, um,
policy doesn't level the playing field.
Um, actually quite the opposite.
It makes it more difficult for people
who may actually have a lot of merit in what they want
to offer, but it makes more difficult for them
to participate.
So my concern is that the problem
with the ACT was not the clauses in and of themselves,
but that there might have been overreach in terms
of implementation.
The ACT have never stated any targets,
never stated any quotas.
Um, it simply requests that, that we consider the diversity
and the equity and the inclusion in our society that speaks
to social cohesion, that speaks to trust building.
Yeah, I would like to, um, offer a very personal reflection.
And that's the fact that I come from South Africa.
No, no doubt. You can hear that from the accent.
Um, that's a society where exclusion was embedded in policy,
that was a moral failure of that country.
However, I have the lived experience of
what it looks like when people can't see themselves in
policy, where people feel excluded from policy.
Um, that is not just a system that
disadvantages those excluded.
It is also a system
that has a profound impact on those in the center,
the le the level of safety that they feel in a country
where inclusion is not embedded.
Um, and so in and social cohesion is not embedded in the
policy that we are, um, proposing.
So it is for me a very personal, um, situation.
Uh, we live in a very small country.
Our networks are very tight.
Two degrees of separation is a reality here.
Um, and in such a place it's very easy.
It's even natural for us
to stay within our familiar circles if we don't
intentionally look board in the gate to participation.
So, um, in terms of the evidence,
the evidence really does matter.
The OECD, the World Bank, Harvard, all show that countries
and organizations with strong inclusion frameworks tend
to have higher trust in institutions,
stronger innovation outcomes,
better resilience in times of crisis.
And in fact, cohesion suffers not from too much diversity,
but it suffers from unin attended diversity when people
feel, um, they expected to integrate into systems
that weren't built for them.
So it's not, it's not about dissolving our shared values,
it's about, about ensuring that everybody's got a fair shot.
So, um, we oppose Bill in its current form.
Um, we, we value the fact
that there's a strengthening in terms
of performance outcomes.
Um, but we do want to ask that those specific, um,
clauses speak to diversity, equity, inclusion be reviewed.
Thank you so much for your submission and your,
and your personal reflection.
Um, Andy's got a question. I've also got the question.
I think it's really good that you focused on merits, um,
and the submission, it's my very strong view
that there haven't been appointments made
that have not been, um, without merit in the public service.
And as soon as I have asked that question,
I've not been able to, um, no one has responded with, uh,
an example to show the opposite.
And I've not, it's my understanding that that can sit aside,
um, alongside and work with, um, the diversity, um,
and inclusion requirements that we have.
And I and as someone who's trust specifically focuses on
that, could you just explain how, how that is possible?
Well, merit and diversity are not mutually exclusive.
Um, we find, I would find it absolutely puzzling to think
that we wouldn't get merit across the diversity
of our society in terms of how they're able to contribute.
If we understand what the outcomes of a specific role is,
um, what the skill sets are.
All we need to do is
to broaden the gate about where are we looking.
That's all. Ultimately what it does is we get better merit
because we are not containing our scope of where we look
to just the networks that we are used to looking at.
So by broadening the gates of who can show up with merit,
we are actually doing ourselves a big service in terms
of getting the best people into the job.
For me, it's an irony actually that, um,
by removing those clauses, we are,
we've been talking about ideological
capture, removing those clauses.
For me it's almost more ideological capture than
inserting them in the first place was. Thank you. Um, yeah,
Thank you Andy.
Look, I completely agree with you in terms
of broadening the gate.
Yeah. What I'm trying, what I'm trying to get to is a,
is you talked about exclusion.
Now, if you deliberately say we're gonna exclude a certain
group of people from appointment,
then you have not broadened the gate, narrowed it down.
However I've seen exactly.
In a sense, the reverse in quite a number of positions
are mostly governments and,
and managed senior management type positions
where they've said, effectively we are looking for somebody
who is, you know, they, they specify the gender
and they specify the, the essentially the racial categories.
And if you're not part of those, you are being excluded.
Yeah. And,
and I think, I think you know exactly what I mean.
I know exactly what you saying. So, so how does that square,
or is that just people getting overeager to broaden the gate
and by broadening the gate, they've narrowed part of it?
I think once again, I wanna say these things
aren't mutually exclusive.
Well, they've made it mutually
exclusive in those situations.
Yeah. As well. Um, okay.
Well they have, so I, I think
that you can get merit across the spectrum.
Agree. That's the first thing I wanna say.
What the act does is not to say go look for somebody
of this gender and this ethnicity and any of that.
That's a problem of implementation. Yes.
That's not a problem of the act. Okay.
So how we make sure that people don't do that.
So there's a lot of work that need
to go into the foundations of how we, it's,
it's things like how we write our job descriptions
that we don't unintentionally include things
where people go, oh, I, I've got care responsibilities,
so I clearly can't work these hours that are stipulated.
And that's an easy, um, example,
but we have to make very sure that we stipulate
what those skills are and that people are
objectively without any identity attached to that being
measured against those skills.
Making sure that we broaden the gate of
who can we get into the
pipeline for consideration. So, so just
To finish it off then, when people specifically put in
positions, effectively, if you are not, you know, female
and you're not, you know,
of a particular e ethnic group,
don't bother applying. That's overreaching.
Yes. It doesn't happen. Yes, it does happen.
Yeah, because I've seen quite a lot of them.
It would be, it would be overreaching if it does
happen. I, um,
Show me the examples.
Find, so unfortunately we have run outta time.
You'll see there's a, um,
there's a healthy, um, discussion happening.
But thank you so much for your, um, submission
and for answering our questions.
We really appreciate the, um, you being here
and the work of the, um, organization, the trust.
Thank you much. Thank you. Thank you.
Um, we've got now Animal Plant
and Health Association New Zealand.
Thank You. Welcome Liz. Thank you. Thank you.
We've got, um, 10 minutes set aside
for your, um, submission today.
So as, as you've seen with previous submitters,
you're welcome to use all of that time
or leave some time for questions or debate at the end.
Thank you. Over to you.
Value and appreciate your time.
And thank you for the opportunity
to share our members' perspective on the Public
Service Act amendments.
Um, so Animal and Plant Health New Zealand, we represent 80
New Zealand and global organizations that research
and develop the manufacture, distribute and sell animal
and plant health products.
Now why does any of that matter?
These products underpin New Zealand's goals
for sustainability, biosecurity conservation and growth.
The public service, first off,
we'd like to acknowledge them.
They play an absolutely critical role.
Our members also strongly support this bill
to deliver a more, um, responsive, efficient,
and transparent public service.
And notably the area of interest to them is
around the regulatory approvals process for agricultural
and horticultural products.
Supporting that is a 2025 Ministry for Regulation Review
that looked at that system
and identified four key themes, themes around inefficiencies
and delay, a lack of strategic direction, uncertainty,
uncertainty and disproportionate regulation concerns
around resourcing, engagement and use of industry funds
and a breakdown of trust and confidence in that system.
In summary, our members top three learnings from
that review come down to three things,
targets transparency and trust.
So if we look at theme number one around targets,
it is vital that without focus on impact
targets are ineffective.
So ultimately the opportunity for this bill when we listen
to our members on the ground, is to make targets great again
by looking at a number of areas.
One, it's spec, specifically looking at targets
around risk efficiency and comms and engagement.
These are often overlooked areas,
but they're absolutely vital.
It's looking at areas like targets that en enable a culture
of empowerment by measuring the level of operational
and risk decision making, delegation
considering testing your targets
with those users on the ground that are actually using it so
that performance on paper matches performance on the ground.
It's looking to strengthen performance outcomes
to budget appropriations,
considering identifying the agencies that do that well
and mirroring that.
And another key theme from members was around considering
how performance can
and management can be optimized when you're operating in a
really complex governance arena with ministers, boards,
government agencies, and also the political
and the timing cycles.
So for our members listening to them,
it's all about impact on the ground and what you measure.
The second big theme was
around transparency, building trust.
And really, again, in a complex operating environment
where it's easy to bring up a lot of information,
simplicity is vital.
So it's around how do you simplify, standardize
and layers focus performance reporting targets on
what matters most in a really busy environment.
External engagement surveys also matter.
So it's thinking about how do you also identify the agencies
that are doing that well.
And obviously funding is a big theme right across government
at the moment that transparency
and reporting is really key to future trust
and confidence in industry investment.
As a final theme from our members, they did urge just
to give some careful consideration to the provisions
around repealing diversity, equity
and pay equity centers predominantly.
That was from a theme like, like any good board diversity
of perspectives and skills is important.
So it's thinking about ensuring we strike the right balance
with those and ensuring that we don't lose a key part
of the workforce in terms of gender and age representation.
Noting that our workforce has emerged
and changed significantly in the last couple of years.
Are the existing settings still fit
for purpose was a consideration.
With that, I'll wrap up respectful of your time
and will open up for any questions.
Thank you so much for your submission.
Um, I had a question, uh, just to clarify.
So, um, I've seen in your submission the areas
that you support in this bill, uh,
and I think you've got, um, also alluding
to some further changes that you
would like the government to make.
So there these kinda specific, um, I note
that you support the bill, but are there specific additional
changes that you were also looking, um, to,
to be made in this bill?
Along the lines of the, the kind
of regulatory requirements of your organization
Looking at the Ministry for Regulation review
and our members experience, it comes down to
time is people's most precious commodity.
And when you're holding to account,
that is really difficult.
So it's around those targets, it's
around setting those performance targets,
but looking specifically around risk and comms
and engagement, they were two really important themes
that have come through from our members.
Hmm, okay. So that's in addition
to what's in here at the moment. Thank you Andy.
So just on that, 'cause it's,
you might've heard some of the questions I asked earlier.
Um, two, two areas. This.
One of them is that one about, um, KPIs for,
we've got the talk about KPIs for chief executives
and you kind of translate that to KPIs that organizations,
but what, but clear expectations of
what we expect from organizations to deliver.
Do you think they're clear enough across the board
of both areas you interface with?
And then I've got one other question.
Listening to our members, this opportunity
to test those targets with those on the ground so that
what has been reported on paper matches actual
impact on the ground.
And there was also that theme around we are dealing
with delays in a system
and there's also question around decision making.
So it's also thinking about targets that you set
for an agency, but where, how can you identify the
agencies that delegate?
Well, and its striking risk.
Balance was a key theme in our review also.
So it's considering how your targets can go
that little bit further to give you a sense of
how it's delivering outcomes.
Yeah. Okay. And look, the other area was, we had a,
a discussion earlier and I don't think you were in the room
at that point, but if you were, that's great.
Um, and that was about the purpose statement
in the, for the public service.
And one of the changes which has been suggested, uh, here,
uh, is in the, in the bill is to include acting with the,
that the public service acts with a spirit of service
to the community and in accordance with law.
Do you ever view that that's a useful addition
because it strikes me as a big difference
between public service and bureaucracy
Listening to our members.
A couple of themes. Spirit is important
as well as letter of the law.
So that's a governance, uh, best practice element as well.
Um, but obviously we represent the New Zealand community
and the outcomes we are trying to achieve drive that.
So overall our members were supportive
of the Bill's intent. Yes. Yeah.
Good. Thank you. Um, just a kind of quick question, um,
with the DEI um, discussion, uh, you said
that you kind of value, uh, that diversity
that you have on, on boards.
Um, I I think you heard our previous,
um, one of our previous submitters.
So do you think that, um, I, I know
that's not the particular focus of your bill,
but do you think that the existing requirements
that promote diversity and con
and inclusion could sit alongside the, the other kind
of changes in the bill
And Still promote that diversity?
I think if we listen to our members
and the boards that they represent
and set on, one of the themes
that is coming up is our workforce is changing.
And it, it, it's, it's simply
to say there are best practice provisions there from a
governance perspective, but there's never any harm in
testing of the still fit for purpose
or have we missed anything.
Um, similar to our targets, if you want
to see impact on the ground, are we actually testing targets
with those users in the system?
'cause they, the outcomes matter, they really want,
you know, it matters most to them. Yeah. Thank
You. Thank you so much. Thank
you for your time today.
Thank you for your submission.
Really excellent submissions this morning,
um, covering the diverse points.
So thank you all very much for being here. Uh, that ends.